README.md, before:

# Ledger.py: command-line, double-entry accounting in python

**Ledger.py** is a simple, command-line, double-entry accounting
system. It reads transactions written in a simple format from a
text file and produces summary reports in text.

Because transaction data is stored as text, it can be managed
using a version control system like git. This makes it easy
to maintain an audit trail.

**Ledger.py** is like John Wiegley's
[Ledger](http://www.ledger-cli.org/), but simpler.

## Getting started
The program is currently contained in a single python file. You can grab it and try it out like this:
```
# Grab the code
git clone git://github.com/mafm/ledger.py
cd ledger.py

# Look at some examples
./ledger.py examples/sample.transactions --print-balances
./ledger.py examples/sample.transactions --print-register Expenses
./ledger.py examples/sample.transactions --print-register Expenses:Electricity
```

There's not much documentation yet, but **ledger.py** is simple. You should be able to work out most
of what's going on by looking at the example input files and reading the code.

### Requirements

As far as I know, **ledger.py** needs only Python 2.7. I am currently using it with Python 2.7.2+.

#### Testing

If you have nosetests installed, you can also run some tests. They are
not comprehensive.

## Status

I am using this program on a daily basis to do real work. I believe that what _has_ been implemented is more
or less correct. However, this program hasn't been extensively tested. Use it at your own risk.

Lots of useful easy-to-implement features have not yet been
implemented. I am currently (April 2013) attempting to implement one
or two of the missing features per week.

## Origins

**Ledger.py** is similar to, and partly inspired by, John Wiegley's Ledger: http://www.ledger-cli.org/.

**Ledger.py** is also similar to some older double-entry accounting
software I wrote using wxPython in 2004. Although that program had a GUI, and
I used it for nearly ten years, it was more complex than **ledger.py**,
and I found it less convenient to use.

Commit message:

Two more tests.
Just to increase coverage. It's pretty easy to check test coverage
using the pip coverage package.

README.md, after:

# Ledger.py: command-line, double-entry accounting in python

**Ledger.py** is a simple, command-line, double-entry accounting
system. It reads transactions written in a simple format from a
text file and produces summary reports in text.

Because transaction data is stored as text, it can be managed
using a version control system like git. This makes it easy
to maintain an audit trail.

**Ledger.py** is like John Wiegley's
[Ledger](http://www.ledger-cli.org/), but simpler.

## Getting started
The program is currently contained in a single python file. You can grab it and try it out like this:
```
# Grab the code
git clone git://github.com/mafm/ledger.py
cd ledger.py

# Look at some examples
./ledger.py examples/sample.transactions --print-balances
./ledger.py examples/sample.transactions --print-register Expenses
./ledger.py examples/sample.transactions --print-register Expenses:Electricity
```

There's not much documentation yet, but **ledger.py** is simple. You should be able to work out most
of what's going on by looking at the example input files and reading the code.

### Requirements

As far as I know, **ledger.py** needs only Python 2.7. I am currently using it with Python 2.7.2+.

#### Testing

If you have nosetests installed, you can also run some tests. They are
not comprehensive. If you have coverage installed, you can also look
at the test coverage like this: ```nosetests --with-coverage
--cover-package=ledger```.

## Status

I am using this program on a daily basis to do real work. I believe that what _has_ been implemented is more
or less correct. However, this program hasn't been extensively tested. Use it at your own risk.

Lots of useful easy-to-implement features have not yet been
implemented. I am currently (April 2013) attempting to implement one
or two of the missing features per week.

## Origins

**Ledger.py** is similar to, and partly inspired by, John Wiegley's Ledger: http://www.ledger-cli.org/.

**Ledger.py** is also similar to some older double-entry accounting
software I wrote using wxPython in 2004. Although that program had a GUI, and
I used it for nearly ten years, it was more complex than **ledger.py**,
and I found it less convenient to use.
